---
title: 'Holochain'
subtitle: 'Distributed Coordination by Scaled Consent not Global Consensus'
author: 
 - Eric Harris-Braun
 - Arthur Brock
abstract: |
 In this paper we present a frame and a specification for a generalized system for 
 large scale distributed coordination that does not rely on global consensus. We start
 with some axioms; we proceed to describe the consequences of these axioms, looking 
 at the problem through the lens of scaling consent; we present an informal description 
 of the system; we provide a more formal outline of the necessary integrity guarantees 
 and system components needed to deliver those guarantees; and finally we conclude with 
 a high-level yet sufficiently detailed technical specification of our implementation 
 of such a system.
documentclass: 'revtex4-1'
references:
- type: article-journal
  id: xxx
  author:
  - family: Watson
    given: J. D.
  - family: Crick
    given: F. H. C.
  issued:
    date-parts:
    - - 1953
      - 4
      - 25
  title: 'Molecular structure of nucleic acids: a structure for
    deoxyribose nucleic acid'
  title-short: Molecular structure of nucleic acids
  container-title: Nature
  volume: 171
  issue: 4356
  page: 737-738
  DOI: 10.1038/171737a0
  URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/171737a0
  language: en-GB
---

Introduction
============

Preamble
--------

The first version of the [[Holochain white
paper]{.underline}](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-proto/blob/whitepaper/holochain.pdf)\cite{xxx}
took a very formal approach to describing generalized distributed
computation schemes and carefully compared the approach taken by
Blockchain based systems with the approach taken by Holochain as well as
providing formal reasoning for the benefits of Holochain's agent centric
approach.

In this second version, we describe Holochain on its own terms by
providing the highest level view of our approach and our starting
axioms. At the next level of detail we provide an informal system
description using the metaphor of games. Then we dive into deeper detail
with a formal system description including the specific context and
assumptions we come from, the integrity guarantees Holochain offers, and
a formal state model and discussion of security and safety concerns.
Finally at the most detailed level we provide an implementation
specification in Appendix A.

Axioms
------

We begin by stating our axioms[^byzantine] regarding the nature of coordination:

[^byzantine]: Some readers may come to the problems of distributed coordination
    from the framework laid out by the literature on Byzantine Fault
    Tolerance. These axioms and a discussion of why start with them are
    explained in our paper The Players of Ludos: Beyond Byzantium
    \[LINK: [[The Players of
    Ludos]{.underline}](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HBNgIooElD5widCuX9XmiOzbVIpEF5XXH67mZbnUFjo/edit#)\].

1.  **Coordination arises from agents** starting from the same
  ground-rules and acting as soon as each party in any interaction
  can confirm that each other\'s actions confirm that actions or
  interactions conform to those ground rules. (Thus, in our frame,
  coordination looks like alignment heading in the same direction,
  rather than agreement proceeding in lockstep.)

1.  **Coordination is grammatic**, in that it comes from embodying a
  geometry that removes uncertainty, and embodying an ability to
  compose different coordinative subsystems that have different
  ground-rules.

Axiom 1 arises from the insight that we cannot fight against the
physical reality of different experiences by different nodes in the
context of networked interaction nor fight against the real-world
impossibility of determining global temporal order because of the
non-existence of simultaneity. Instead, any coordination system must
align its ontology with the truth that **global state actually does not
exist**. Thus we start with what does actually exist: local temporal
state. This local state can be shared with, and validated by, others in
conformity with pre-defined ground-rules. In so doing we can still
achieve difficult and complex coordination safely (including in the
context of problems on the scale of global monetary transactions)
without the costs and bottlenecks that arise from starting from the
ontology of a single shared global state. Holochain is an implementation
of a system using this alternate frame.

Axiom 2 arises from the insight that systems for successful large scale
coordination demand the property of anti-fragility, that is, they must
perform better under perturbation[^antifragile]. Coordination happens in the
context of fundamentally dynamic environments in which the coordinating
elements are changed by the fact of their coordination. Coordination is
a co-evolutionary context. We claim by this axiom that what meets the
challenge of anti-fragility in such contexts is composable sub-systems,
in which the composition comes out of a grammatics that embodies the
actual dimensionality of the problem subdomains (i.e. their geometry),
and by which agents in that context can react powerfully to
perturbations because the available composability is dimensionally
aligned.

[^antifragile]: Antifragile: Things that Gain from Disorder. Nassim Nicholas Taleb

The core axiom (though not explicitly stated as such) of the Byzantine
Generals Problem is that coordination starts AFTER "consensus on state",
i.e. that the Lieutenants can't execute their plan until they have
followed the consensus algorithm and arrived at single data reality[^faults].
This axiom leads system designers to figure out how to implement
machinery for **Global Consensus**. Our axioms lead us, instead, to
implement tooling for **Scaling Consent** as an alternate solution to
the Byzantine Generals Problem.

[^faults]: In Reaching Agreement in the Presence of Faults:
    [[https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/322186.322188]{.underline}](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/322186.322188)
    MARSHALL PEASE, ROBERT SHOSTAK, and LESLIE LAMPORT, this single data
    reality is called "interactive consistency" as is about the vector
    of "Private Values" sent by each node.

From Global Consensus to Scaled Consent
---------------------------------------

In distributed systems, we believe that it is absolutely fundamental to
understand that every action taken by an agent in any social context,
happens because that agent has crossed a confidence threshold of some
sort, from its own point of view, that the given action is appropriate
to take. Stated another way: agentic assessment of the social context
and its coherence allows agents to act. This is always true, be it as
solved in the Byzantine Generals Problem problem or by Blockchain
consensus solutions.

We also start from the understanding that social spaces are inherently
uncertain. Thus, coordination/collaboration is never about deterministic
certainty but simply about the capacity to remove sufficient uncertainty
to provide confidence for action, which is always contextual. Such
confidence indicates **social coherence**. This notion of social
coherence is the single most important design goal of Holochain: to
create the tooling that in contextually appropriate ways leads to
increasing social coherence.

Given the above, we propose a very simple approach to creating tooling
capacity for building increasing certainty: **enable validated global
visibility, on demand, of local state**. In this approach, we
distinguish between authorship, which is about local state changes
initiated by agents, and authority, which is about distributing the
responsibility of validating and making visible those state changes
across the participants in the network. This approach requires that we:

1.  Ensure that all agents know the "ground-rules". i.e. offer a
  framework for composing lots of small units of social agreement in
  which players can add deterministic elements of certainty into
  their interactions.

2.  Ensure that all agents can *reliably* see what's going on. i.e.
  offer a framework for adding to and querying a collectively held
  database in which there is a knowable level of confidence in its
  reliability and integrity that can also be graduated to fit the
  circumstances.

The first point we deliver through various types of **Validation
Rules**. Validation rules create certainty in the following dimensions
with examples:

-   Content: a value does not exceed a maximum length

-   Structure: an entry consists of a certain set of types of data

-   Sequence: someone can not spend credits they have not already
  received earlier on their chain

-   Process: a transaction must be approved and signed by a notary

-   Behavior: one does not take an action more frequently than a certain
  rate

The second point we deliver through various types of **Intrinsic Data
Integrity**. We use a number of cryptographic methods to create
self-proving data of various types:

-   Provenance: An agent's network address is their public key. Thus,
  when interacting with agents it's possible to have deterministic
  confidence in who one is interacting with because there is no
  identity layer between network locations subject to attack
  surface. I.e. unlike the web address, you don't need a domain name
  certificate associated with the domain name to become confident of
  "who" you are talking to.

-   Signatures: Because provenance is a public key, it's also easy to
  create self-proving authenticity. All messages sent, and all data
  committed to chains is signed by agents using their public key.
  Thus any agent can immediately and with high confidence, verify
  the authenticity of messages and data.

-   Hashes: All data on our DHT is addressed by its hash. Thus, when
  retrieving data it's possible to have deterministic confidence
  that it hasn't been tampered with by whoever was storing it.

-   Structural Monotonicity (for chains and DHT): non-repudiable
  state-change \[TODO: ACB\]

-   Logical Monotonicity: Crossings that you can't uncross (once
  something has become true, it can't become untrue) \[TODO: ACB\]

-   Common Genesis: The Validation Rules and joining criteria of an
  application are the first entry in every chain. This
  provides a mechanism for self-proving shared ground rules. Any
  agent can examine the chain of any other agent all the way back to
  the source and thus have high confidence that they have actually
  committed to play by the same rules.

The two domains of Validation Rules and Intrinsic Data Integrity, and
their component dimensionality, amounts to what we might call a
"Geometry of Certainty". Inside the clarity of such a geometry, the
gradients of certainty become both much more visible, and much easier to
build appropriately for. Thus it provides a context of agents being able
to scale up their consent to play together in ways that meet their
safety requirements. This is why we call our approach "Scaling Consent."
It is what enables coherent collaborative action without first achieving
global consensus.

