.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/bug_report.md, before:

---
name: Bug report
about: Create a report to help us improve
title: "[BUG]"
labels: ''
assignees: ''

---

**Describe the bug**
A clear and concise description of what the bug is, how you encountered it, and
the text of any error you received.

**Expected behavior**
A clear and concise description of what you expected to happen.

**System information:**
 - OS: [e.g. iOS]
 - Browser [e.g. chrome, safari]
 - Holochain and HDK Version (run `hn-introspect` as well as `holochain --build-info`
 from the nix shell and paste output)

**Steps to reproduce**
For isolating the bug, it is helpful to see a failing test or a repo that
reproduces the bug in a fresh hApp. Some suggestions for methods
of writing a reproduction of a bug:

- Write a failing test with [Sweettest](https://docs.rs/holochain/latest/holochain/sweettest/index.html)
- Write a failing test with [Tryorama](https://github.com/holochain/tryorama/)
- Create a minimal reproduction project using `hn-init` and add the code that
produces the bug.

**Screenshots**
If applicable, add screenshots to help explain your problem.

**Additional context**
Add any other context about the problem here.

Commit message:

Update CONTRIBUTING.md (#1576)
* Some more up-to-date CONTRIBUTING and bug report guidelines

* Restructuring CONTRIBUTING.md

* Apply suggestions from code review

Co-authored-by: Jost Schulte <jost.schulte@protonmail.com>

* Small edits

* Add link to CONTRIBUTING

Co-authored-by: Jost Schulte <jost.schulte@protonmail.com>
Co-authored-by: David Meister <thedavidmeister@gmail.com>

.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/bug_report.md, after:

---
name: Bug report
about: Create a report to help us improve
title: "[BUG]"
labels: ''
assignees: ''

---

**Describe the bug**
A clear and concise description of what the bug is, how you encountered it, and
the text of any error you received.

**Expected behavior**
A clear and concise description of what you expected to happen.

**System information:**
 - OS: [e.g. iOS]
 - Browser [e.g. chrome, safari]
 - Holochain and HDK Version (run `hn-introspect` as well as `holochain --build-info`
 from the nix shell and paste output)

**Steps to reproduce**
Detailed, specific steps which will reliably reproduce this bug.

If you have the means to do so, it would be extremely helpful to create a minimal reproduction of the problem.
The most helpful form of reproduction is to add a test directly to our existing codebase via a pull request,
so that we have a regression test for that bug. Please read the section in our 
[CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop/CONTRIBUTING.md) guide titled "Bug fixes and minimal reproductions"
for instructions on the best way to create a PR with a failing test.

**Screenshots**
If applicable, add screenshots to help explain your problem.

**Additional context**
Add any other context about the problem here.
